저는 지식이 짧아서 여기 계신 분들처럼 전문적인 것들은 잘 모릅니다. 하지만 제가 알기로는 이것이 시장이 효율적이라는 가설하에 프로그램을 설계하는 것으로 알고 있습니다. 아마 LTCM이라는 유명한 펀드를 알고 계실텐데, 실은 이 LTCM이 아마 지금 계신 카페에 계신 분들께서 생각하시는  펀드와 비슷한 유형이라고 생각합니다. 그런데 이런 유형의 펀드들은 시장의 변동성이 커지거나, 갑작스러운 사태가 발생했을 때, 큰 손실이 발생했던 것으로 경험했습니다. 지난 7월에도 골드만 삭스의 차익거래 펀드가 큰 손실 규모를 발표하면서, 금융 시장이 혼란에 빠졌었습니다. 얼핏 기억하기로는 르네상스 테크놀러지도 그렇게 재미못봤다는 기사를 접했는데요. 솔직히 정확한 내막이야 알기 힘들겠지만... 어쨋든 르네상스 테크놀러지처럼 오래 운용되는 펀드가 있는가 하면, LTCM처럼 몇 년 가지 못하는 펀드가 있는데 이 차이가 어디서 비롯된다고 생각하시는지 궁금합니다. 그리고 두번 째로 여쭙고 싶은 것은 '천재들의 실패'라는 LTCM 헤지펀드의 몰락을 다룬 책에서 조지 소로스와 LTCM 펀드의 파트너 메리웨더가 대화하는 부분이 나옵니다. 메리웨더는 러시아 디폴트 사태이후 엄청나게 큰 손실을 입었고, 소로스에게 자금을 요청하기 위해 왔습니다.메리웨더는 소로스에게 10만년 만에 한번 맞는 퍼팩트를 맞았다고 얘기합니다.소로스는 자기는 그렇게 생각하지 않는다면서, 시장이 이렇게 극단적으로 치닫는 일은 의외로 흔하다고 얘기합니다. 그러면서 메리웨더에게 2주간의 기한을 줍니다. '이 기간 동안 손실을 일정 부분 회복하지 못한다면 자신은 LTCM에 투자를 하지 않겠다.'그러나  LTCM은 계속 손실을 보게 되고, 결국에는 연방준비 위원회가 마련한 컨소시움을 통해 구제받게 됩니다.  아마 나심 탈렙이라는 사람이 금융시장에 대해 소로스와 비슷한 견해를 나타냈는데, 저는 그의 저서나 책을 자세히 읽어본 바는 없지만, 처근 그가 인터뷰한 사를 읽어볼 수 있었습니다. 주로 MPT와 금융과학에 대한 비판이었는데, 저는 이것들에 대해 깊숙하게 배우지 못했지만, 나름대로 훌륭한 도구가 되고, 여러모로 유용한 것들을 제공한다고 생각합니다. 그러나 이 사람은 너무 지나치게 깎아내리더군요. 잘 모르는 자의 입장으로서 여쭙는데 이러한 비판에 대해 어떻게 생각하시는지요?또한 소로스가 지적했던 데로, 누구도 예상치 못했던 시장의 갑작스러운 충격에 대해서 금융 과학과 MPT는 어떤 해법을 제시하고 있나요?   그리고 밑에 기사를 첨부하겠습니다.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------The pseudo-science hurting markets<?xml:namespace prefix = o ns = "urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:office" />By Nassim Nicholas Taleb, FT.com sitePublished: Oct 23, 2007  Last August, The Wall Street Journal published a statement by one Matthew Rothman, financial economist, expressing his surprise that financial markets experienced a string of events that "would happen once in 10,000 years". A portrait of Mr Rothman accompanying the article reveals that he is consider­ably younger than 10,000 years; it is therefore fair to assume he is not drawing his inference from his own empirical experience but from some theoretical model that produces the risk of rare events, or what he perceives to be rare events. The theories Mr Rothman was using to produce his odds of these events were "Nobel-crowned" methods of the so-called modern portfolio theory designed to compute the risks of financial portfolios. MPT is the foundation of works in economics and finance that several times received the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Econ­omic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel. The prize was created (and funded) by the Swedish central bank and has been progressively confused with the regular Nobel set up by Alfred Nobel; it is now mislabelled the "Nobel Prize for economics".MPT produces measures such as "sigmas", "betas", "Sharpe ratios", "correlation", "value at risk", "optimal portfolios" and "capital asset pricing model" that are incompatible with the possibility of those consequential rare events I call "black swans" (owing to their rarity, as most swans are white). So my problem is that the prize is not just an insult to science; it has been putting the financial system at risk of blow-ups.I was a trader and risk manager for almost 20 years (before experiencing battle fatigue). There is no way my and my colleagues' accumulated knowledge of market risks can be passed on to the next generation. Business schools block the transmission of our practical know-how and empirical tricks and the knowledge dies with us. We learn from crisis to crisis that MPT has the empirical and scientific validity of astrology (without the aesthetics), yet the lessons are ignored in what is taught to 150,000 business school students worldwide.Academic economists are no more self-serving than other professions. You should blame those in the real world who give them the means to be taken seriously: those awarding that "Nobel" prize.In 1990 William Sharpe and Harry Markowitz won the prize three years after the stock market crash of 1987, an event that, if anything, completely demolished the laureates' ideas on portfolio construction. Further, the crash of 1987 was no exception: the great mathematical scientist Benoît Mandelbrot showed in the 1960s that these wild variations play a cumulative role in markets - they are "unexpected" only by the fools of econ­omic theories.Then, in 1997, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded the prize to Robert Merton and Myron Scholes for their option pricing formula. I (and many traders) find the prize offensive: many, such as the mathematician and trader Ed Thorp, used a more realistic approach to the formula years before. What Mr Merton and Mr Scholes did was to make it compatible with financial economic theory, by "re-deriving" it assuming "dynamic hedging", a method of continuous adjustment of portfolios by buying and selling securities in response to price variations.Dynamic hedging assumes no jumps - it fails miserably in all markets and did so catastrophically in 1987 (failures textbooks do not like to mention).Later, Robert Engle received the prize for "Arch", a complicated method of prediction of volatility that does not predict better than simple rules - it was "successful" academically, even though it underperformed simple volat­ility forecasts that my colleagues and I used to make a living.The environment in financial econ­omics is reminiscent of medieval medicine, which refused to incorporate the ob­servations and experiences of the ple­beian barbers and surgeons. Medicine used to kill more patients than it saved - just as financial economics endangers the system by creating, not reducing, risk. But how did financial econ­omics take on the appearance of a science? Not by experiments (perhaps the only true scientist who got the prize was Daniel Kahneman, who happens to be a psychologist, not an econ­omist). It did so by drowning us in mathematics with abstract "theorems". Prof Merton's book Continuous Time Finance contains 339 mentions of the word "theorem" (or equivalent). An average physics book of the same length has 25 such mentions. Yet while economic models, it has been shown, work hardly better than random guesses or the intuition of cab drivers, physics can predict a wide range of phe­nomena with a tenth decimal precision.  Every time I have questioned these methods I have been abruptly countered with: "they have the Nobel", which I have found impossible to argue with. There are even practitioner associations such as the International Association of Financial Engineers partaking of the cover-up and promoting this pseudo-science among financial in­stitutions. The knowledge and risk awareness we are accumulating from the current subprime crisis and its aftermath will most certainly not make it to business schools. The previous dozen crises and experiences did not do so. It will be dying with us, unless we discredit that absurd Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel commonly called the "Nobel Prize".  The writer is author of The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable, shortlisted for the FT/Goldman Sachs Business Book of the Year Award. The winner will be announced at a ­dinner in London tomorrow night  투표는 표시되지 않습니다.